Foundations of Project Management TOC \h \u \z \t &quot;Heading 1,1,Heading 2,2,Heading 3,3,Heading 4,4,Heading 5,5,Heading 6,6,&quot; What is project management? PAGEREF _s885mwv2pq0q \h 2 What is a project? PAGEREF _38zuo1ck6ae5 \h 2 What is project management? PAGEREF _4g29yxr7cxww \h 2 Why is project management? PAGEREF _t8opfyssgum \h 2 What does a project manager do? PAGEREF _azukc8gq7v7k \h 2 A project manager's daily responsibilities PAGEREF _od8b5ib3dgx3 \h 2 ● Planning and organizing: PAGEREF _3sy09so5eoas \h 2 ● Managing tasks: PAGEREF _k2auqknox166 \h 3 ● Managing budgeting and controlling costs and other factors: PAGEREF _w41nk9vqsvd9 \h 3 Project manager roles: PAGEREF _okzc2ctfu3sh \h 3 Introductory-level project management roles PAGEREF _w4361j3nlu4d \h 3 Traditional project management roles: PAGEREF _bigcyw154ztm \h 4 Operational management roles PAGEREF _4wjwzatyb39x \h 4 Agile roles PAGEREF _by184nagvoq \h 5 Q/ What are some of the parts of project management that you're drawn to? PAGEREF _xd2y6whl1a2a \h 5 These duties are nearly a perfect match for your project management skills: PAGEREF _ooh5veopq2eu \h 5 Becoming an effective project manager PAGEREF _v8tmx94tfh7x \h 6 Learning Objectives PAGEREF _drov7dqh9df3 \h 6 The value of a project manager PAGEREF _t34he7zev0vr \h 6 Key project manager roles and responsibilities PAGEREF _zhe03xymyzv5 \h 7 A project manager’s role within a team PAGEREF _eovbp2a0rnqp \h 7 The core skills of a project manager PAGEREF _3kyhb5eo4sf \h 7 Leadership and team dynamics PAGEREF _ujz33dtqcpvz \h 8 The project management life cycle and methodologies PAGEREF _9ie45uyqrckf \h 9 Learning Objectives PAGEREF _uyehqjvmnjg2 \h 9 The project life cycle PAGEREF _ucpvlf57en3p \h 10 Initiate the project PAGEREF _a8xeep2prikg \h 10 Make a plan PAGEREF _ubg3ssxwl575 \h 10 Execute the project PAGEREF _ge7g15qjsi \h 10 Close the project PAGEREF _t1zgtv3a40g8 \h 11 Key takeaway PAGEREF _9thev2rl193v \h 11 Waterfall and Agile Comparison PAGEREF _mr6qk6eeai2x \h 12 Lean PAGEREF _plsgemu6j9w5 \h 13 Six Sigma PAGEREF _spssn70l7rz \h 13 Lean Six Sigma PAGEREF _s9tc3w3g8c2u \h 13 Common project management approaches and how to select one PAGEREF _x6dk628klaws \h 14 What is project management? What is a project? “A project is a unique endeavor, and usually includes a set of unique deliverables.” “A temporary pursuit. It has a defined beginning and an end.” “A project is a series of tasks that need to be completed to reach a desired outcome. Reaching that desired outcome takes collaboration and careful planning that keeps the project on track and on budget.” What is project management? “Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to meet the project requirements and achieve the desired outcome.” Why is project management? “Project management helps ensure that a project delivers the expected outcomes, both on time and within budget. This takes collaboration and careful planning.” Example: My job adds value to Google through the core aspects of project management is planning and organizing, managing tasks, and budgeting and controlling costs. What does a project manager do? Project managers usually follow a process that involves planning and organizing , managing tasks , budgeting , controlling costs and other factors. If I'm a project manager: How do I add value to an organization every day? What does the day-to-day life of a project manager look like? A project manager's daily responsibilities Planning and organizing: An example of that might be: Gathering requirements from teammates or customers. This means figuring out what exactly your project's trying to accomplish. You might have a kickoff meeting or send a survey. From here you may also work on creating project plans. Creating project plans is a key part of project management. It helps set the tone of the project, keeps everyone on pace and aligned, and helps move tasks along. Managing tasks: The project manager helps manage tasks for the team members and communicates key milestones to the larger team or customers. This helps keep team members, and customers updated on how the project is progressing. Managing budgeting and controlling costs and other factors: It is a common responsibility that project managers have to understand to keep the project on track and within budget. Project manager roles: C onstruction project manager. IT project manager. Engineering project manager. Operations manager. Program manager. Operations Assistant Project Assistant Project Coordinator Program Assistant Introductory-level project management roles Junior Project Manager: Performs all aspects of being a project manager alongside a more experienced professional. Project Administrator: Assists the rest of the project team with administrative tasks. Project/Program Assistant: Supports team members working on a project and offers administrative support. May perform research or create training documents along with other jobs as assigned by program leaders. Project/Program Coordinator: Participates in hands-on project work and administrative tasks. Works under a project manager to make sure projects are completed on time and within budget. Project Support Specialist: Works alongside a project manager and team members to oversee assigned projects. May also be responsible for training and developing employees to perform designated tasks. Traditional project management roles: Project Manager: Responsible for the initiating, planning, executing, monitoring, and closing of a project. Includes industry-specific titles like IT project manager, construction project manager, or engineering project manager, which utilize skills that are transferable among industries. Project Analyst: Moves a project along by sharing information, providing support through data analysis, and contributing to strategy and performance. Project Leader/Director: Drives core decision-making and sets the direction for the project. Usually knowledgeable about the product or deliverable. Project Controller: Primarily responsible for project planning. You are likely to see this job title in industries like engineering and construction. Technical Project Manager: Conducts project planning and management for identified goals within a company. Ensures that projects are completed to the requirements within a defined time frame and budget. Project Management Office (PMO) Analyst: Manages the progress of complex projects to ensure timely execution and completion. Program managers: Manage a group of projects that are related or similar to one another and handle the coordination of these projects. They facilitate effective communication between individual project managers and provide support where necessary. They also help create and manage long-term goals for their organization. Portfolio managers: Responsible for managing a group of related programs within the same organization. They coordinate various programs in order to ensure they are on track and that the organization is meeting its strategic initiatives. Portfolio managers look at all projects and programs within the organization and prioritize work as necessary. Operational management roles Operations Analyst: Manages and coordinates research, investigates workflows, creates business procedures, and recommends changes to improve the project and company. Operations Manager: Oversees strategic decision-making and rolls out plans of action based on financial, schedule, and resource reporting. Chief Operating Officer: Responsible for overseeing the day-to-day administrative and operational functions of a business. Agile roles Scrum Master: Coordinates and guides the Scrum team. Knowledgeable in Agile framework and Scrum and is able to teach others about the Scrum values and principles. May also be listed as a Technical Program Manager or Technical Project Manager. Product Owner: Drives the direction of product development and progress. Q/ What are some of the parts of project management that you're drawn to? Hint/ While you may not have the answer just yet, thinking about these things can help you find suitable roles later. These duties are nearly a perfect match for your project management skills: Like Creating Monthly Status Reports, Helping To Implement New And Necessary Technologies, Tracking Work Plans And Performance Metrics, Assisting Other Members Of The Operations Team On Given Projects Ensuring Timely Responses To Requests for information. Using buzzwords in your job search Interviews questions: Tell me about a time when you had to juggle several tasks at once? Tell me about a time when you had to influence a customer or a teammate? Becoming an effective project manager Learning Objectives Detail the core skills to be a successful project manager. Describe the role and day-to-day responsibilities of a project manager. Discuss when and why it is necessary to have a project manager. Explain the unique value a project manager brings to their team. Describe a project manager's roles and responsibilities, and list their core skills. The value of a project manager Project managers: Shepherd projects from start to finish and serve as guides for their team, using their impeccable organizational and interpersonal skills every step of the way. Project managers add value to their teams and organizations in key ways that include: Prioritization: Project managers add value to their teams and organizations through effective prioritization of tasks required to complete a project. They're experts at helping team members identify and break down large tasks into smaller steps. There'll be times when a project manager may not know which task to prioritize . To determine which ones are the most critical to the success of the project, they'll connect with their teams and with stakeholders to gather information and make a plan. Stakeholders: are people who are interested in and affected by the project's completion and success, like the leader of an organization. Delegation: Project managers use delegation to add value to their teams and organizations by matching tasks to individuals who can best complete the work. Effective communication: Project managers deliver value through effective communication , both with their team and with key stakeholders. Project managers keep in regular contact with their team about the progress of the work and help identify areas where a teammate may need support. How project managers impact organizations F ocusing on the customer. Building a great project team. Fostering relationships and communication. Managing the project. Breaking down barriers. Key project manager roles and responsibilities Project managers usually follow a process that involves planning and organizing, managing tasks, budgeting, and controlling costs, and other factors, so that the project can be completed within the approved budget and timeframe. P lanning and organizing is making use of productivity tools and creating processes. create plans, timelines, schedules, and other forms of documentation to track project completion Budgeting and controlling costs, and other factors monitor and manage the budget, track issues and risks as they arise, and manage quality by mitigating those issues and risks. removing unforeseen barriers that come up. A project task is an activity that needs to be accomplished within a set period of time by you, your team, or your stakeholders. A project manager’s role within a team How does a project manager go about doing that? hold all team members accountable for their assigned tasks. ensure that issues and risks are tracked and visible, and be able to establish escalation paths. understand and help teammates adopt the right workflows and project management styles. collaborate with other teams at the organization to meet the requirements based on project, scope, schedule, and budget. Working with cross-functional teams The core skills of a project manager enabling decision-making, communicating and escalating, flexibility, and strong organizational skills. Planning and scheduling software (templates, workflows, calendars) Collaboration tools (email, collaboration software, dashboards) Documentation (files, plans, spreadsheets) Quality assurance tools (evaluations, productivity trackers, reports) Leadership and team dynamics Key interpersonal skills communication, negotiation, conflict mediation, and understanding motivations The project management life cycle and methodologies Learning Objectives Explain why it is important to understand and follow the life cycle of a project. Define and outline a project’s phases and each phase’s tasks. Compare different program management methodologies and determine which is most effective for a given project. The main phases of a project are initiating the project, identify the budget and resources you'll need, the people involved in your project, and any other details that can impact the successful completion of your project. Define project goals Determine resources, people, and other project details Get project approval making a plan, your plan needs to include a lot of things for example budget, a breakdown of all the tasks that you need to be completed, ways to communicate team roles and responsibilities, a schedule, resources, and what to do in case your project encounters problems or needs to change. Create a budget Set the schedule Establish your team Determine roles and responsibilities Plan for risk and change Establish communications execute and complete tasks, Your role's a little different. While you might be in charge of completing certain tasks in the project, your primary tasks as the project manager are to monitor progress and keep your team motivated. You also remove any obstacles that might come up so that the tasks are executed well and on time. Manage the process Communicate Make adjustments closing the project. Ensure all tasks have been completed Confirm acceptance of the project outcome Reflect on lessons learned Communicate results with stakeholders Celebrate completing the project Formally move on from the project Closing the project is also a chance to evaluate how the project went. You can make notes of what worked and what didn't so you can plan better for next time. The project life cycle Initiate the project In this phase, ask questions to help set the foundation for the project, such as: Who are the stakeholders? What are the client’s or customer’s goals? What is the purpose and mission of the project? What are the measurable objectives for the team? What is the project trying to improve? When does this project need to be completed? What skills and resources will the project require? What will the project cost? What are the benefits? Make a plan In this phase, make a plan to get your project from start to finish. Create a detailed project plan. What are the major milestones? What tasks or deliverables make up each milestone? Build out the schedule so you can properly manage the resources, budget, materials, and timeline. Here, you will create an itemized budget. Execute the project In this phase, put all of your hard work from the first two phases into action. Monitor your project team as they complete project tasks. Break down any barriers that would slow or stop the team from completing tasks. Help keep the team aware of schedule and deliverable expectations. Address weaknesses in your process or examine places where your team may need additional training to meet the project’s goals. Adapt to changes in the project as they arise. Close the project In this phase, close out the project. Identify that your team has completed all of the requested outcomes. Release your team so they can support other projects within the company. Take time with your team to celebrate your successes! Pass off all remaining deliverables and get stakeholder approval. Document the lessons you and your team learned during the project. Reflect on ways to improve in the future. Key takeaway Each phase of the project life cycle has its own significance and reason for existing. By following the project life cycle, you’re ensuring that you are: Capturing the expectations of your customer Setting your project up for success with a plan Executing project tasks and addressing any issues that arise Closing out your project to capture any lessons learned Waterfall and Agile Comparison Waterfall Agile Project manager's role Project manager serves as an active leader by prioritizing and assigning tasks to team members. Agile project manager (or Scrum Master) acts primarily as a facilitator, removing any barriers the team faces. Team shares more responsibility in managing their own work. Scope Project deliverables and plans are well-established and documented in the early stages of initiating and planning. Changes go through a formal change request process. Planning happens in shorter iterations and focuses on delivering value quickly. Subsequent iterations are adjusted in response to feedback or unforeseen issues. Schedule Follows a mostly linear path through the initiating, planning, executing, and closing phases of the project. Time is organized into phases called Sprints. Each Sprint has a defined duration, with a set list of deliverables planned at the start of the Sprint. Cost Costs are kept under control by careful estimation up front and close monitoring throughout the life cycle of the project. Costs and schedule could change with each iteration. Quality Project manager makes plans and clearly defines criteria to measure quality at the beginning of the project. Team solicits ongoing stakeholder input and user feedback by testing products in the field and regularly implementing improvements. Communication Project manager continually communicates progress toward milestones and other key indicators to stakeholders, ensuring that the project is on track to meet the customer’s expectations. Team is customer-focused, with consistent communication between users and the project team. Stakeholders Project manager continually manages and monitors stakeholder engagement to ensure the project is on track. Team frequently provides deliverables to stakeholders throughout the project. Progress toward milestones is dependent upon stakeholder feedback. Lean The Lean methodology focuses on eliminating waste in an operation to add value at each phase of production. The eight types of waste in manufacturing are defects, excess processing, overproduction, waiting, inventory, transportation, motion, and non-utilized talent. To implement Lean project management, use the 5S method to clean up and organize the workplace and the Kanban scheduling system to optimize the flow of work. 2057400 447675 The 5S method has five steps: sort, set in order, shine, standardize, and sustain. The Kanban board is a visualization tool that uses cards to show progress and coordinate work. Six Sigma Six Sigma is a methodology that aims to reduce variations and ensure quality processes are followed, with a 99.9996% quality standard. Its seven key principles focus on customer satisfaction, understanding work processes, smooth flow, waste reduction, variation removal, team collaboration, and systematic improvement. This methodology involves finding measurable aspects of a product or process, inspecting them, and rejecting any items that do not meet the Six Sigma standard. Lean Six Sigma Lean Six Sigma is a combination of two methodologies that promote efficiency, productivity, and quality in processes and products. Lean streamlines processes by building quality in them while Six Sigma reduces variation in products by building in quality from the beginning and inspecting products to ensure quality standards are met. The use of both methods together can improve project efficiency and lead to better-quality products. Common project management approaches and how to select one Waterfall: a traditional, linear approach with clear quality criteria and a focus on task prioritization and assignment Agile: a collaborative, iterative approach with short phases, frequent testing, and shared responsibility for managing work Scrum: an Agile framework with a focus on developing and delivering complex projects through collaboration, accountability, and Sprints Kanban: a tool used in Agile and Lean approaches to provide visual feedback on work progress through Kanban boards or charts Lean: an approach that eliminates waste and streamlines processes using the 5S quality tool and a Kanban scheduling system Six Sigma: an approach that reduces variations and ensures quality processes are followed using the DMAIC process which stands for define, measure, analyze, improve, and control. Lean Six Sigma: a combination of Lean and Six Sigma approaches that is often used in complex or high-risk projects, with a focus on saving money, improving quality, and moving through processes quickly.